## Words of advice when writing programs

**Keep your programs simple to start.** Often new programmers have a grand vision for all the things they want their program to do. “I want to write a role-playing game with graphics and sound and random monsters and dungeons, with a town you can visit to sell the items that you find in the dungeon” If you try to write something too complex to start, you will become overwhelmed and discouraged at your lack of progress. Instead, make your first goal as simple as possible, something that is definitely within your reach. For example, “I want to be able to display a 2-dimensional field on the screen”.

**Add features over time.** Once you have your simple program working and working well, then you can add features to it. For example, once you can display your field, add a character who can walk around. Once you can walk around, add walls that can impede your progress. Once you have walls, build a simple town out of them. Once you have a town, add merchants. By adding each feature incrementally your program will get progressively more complex without overwhelming you in the process.

**Focus on one area at a time.** Don’t try to code everything at once, and don’t divide your attention across multiple tasks. Focus on one task at a time. It is much better to have one working task and five that haven’t been started yet than six partially-working tasks. If you split your attention, you are more likely to make mistakes and forget important details.

**Test each piece of code as you go.** New programmers will often write the entire program in one pass. Then when they compile it for the first time, the compiler reports hundreds of errors. This can not only be intimidating, if your code doesn’t work, it may be hard to figure out why. Instead, write a piece of code, and then compile and test it immediately. If it doesn’t work, you’ll know exactly where the problem is, and it will be easy to fix. Once you are sure that the code works, move to the next piece and repeat. It may take longer to finish writing your code, but when you are done the whole thing should work, and you won’t have to spend twice as long trying to figure out why it doesn’t.

**Don’t invest in perfecting early code.** The first draft of a feature (or program) is rarely good. Furthermore, programs tend to evolve over time, as you add capabilities and find better ways to structure things. If you invest too early in polishing your code (adding lots of documentation, full compliance with best practices, making optimizations), you risk losing all of that investment when a code change is necessary. Instead, get your features minimally working and then move on. As you gain confidence in your solutions, apply successive layers of polish. Don’t aim for perfect -- non-trivial programs are never perfect, and there’s always something more that could be done to improve them. Get to good enough and move on.

Most new programmers will shortcut many of these steps and suggestions (because it seems like a lot of work and/or it’s not as much fun as writing the code). However, for any non-trivial project, following these steps will definitely save you a lot of time in the long run. A little planning up front saves a lot of debugging at the end.

The good news is that once you become comfortable with all of these concepts, they will start coming more naturally to you. Eventually you will get to the point where you can write entire functions without any pre-planning at all.
